...and in keeping ourselves alive. I guess
essentially your entire career has been
supported by NAACP. Oh yes, absolutely. I was, as I
say, worked for Kuiper as a summer student and then
as a graduate student on NASA money. I was kept with
student deferments from the Vietnam War because I
was working in a university on NASA support. And
ever since, and now, of course, I'm a NASA
employee. How do you think NASA has managed this? I
mean, have they understood what's going on in
planetary astronomy? Or have they tried to
overmanage, micromanage, whatever? Or have they
done a reasonably good job? Well, they've done all
of those things because they've tried it all ways.
And in many respects, it has been done very well.
The main problem, I think, is that because modern
planetary science is a child of of NASA and
government funding, it has not found its way in
fully legitimate ways into American academic
circles. There are not enough planetary science
positions in faculties in the universities in the
United States. And this leaves planetary
scientists in a very, very vulnerable position.
NASA, I think, has made minor and relatively
ineffective efforts to to put planetary science
in legitimate academic institutions around the
country, but it could have done and should have
done and must do much more. That is the real
weakness in planetary science now, I think, is
that as the government funding waxes and wanes,
there is no adequate buffer in the American
academic institutions to keep planetary science
moderately comfortable. Do you think planetary
astronomy is part of astronomy? Planetary
astronomy, I think, is and should be considered
part of astronomy. And
there was a time when I was less sure of that, maybe
10 years ago. But the reason I'm adamant about it
now is that it's clear to me that classical
astronomy is moving toward the understanding of
the formation and development of planetary
systems in general, and ours in particular, and at
the same time, people with their training in
planetary astronomy and planetary science are
becoming more and more aware of the connection to
the interstellar medium and the material that is
formed there and incorporated into our solar
system. When we hold in our hands, for example, a
carbonaceous meteorite, we are holding
pre-solar material, material which is preserved
largely intact from its formation and chemical
evolution in the interstellar medium. So there is
a very natural connection in terms of materials
that we can study, objects that we can look at
between planetary astronomy, studies of our
solar system, and studies of the interstellar
medium. Sorry, Gene, to interrupt it yesterday
when they were trying to take your picture. But I
just told Dale here. in the drawing, I got a piece of
Allende. You lucky dog. I saw it come in. Ed Barker
and I were observing on the 82-inch. It was a lot of
serious. He was standing on the catwalk, and I was
down the road. In Texas? Yeah. At McDonald's. And
you talk about the ignorant peasants being
scared. That thing, it was a coup d'etat run. The
moon was just two days past full. that wiped it out.
And you could see the smoke. It was like a crude oil
tank blowing up. And I ran up to Ed, and I said, it's
got to be a carbonaceous chondrite. I mean, he's
right here. You can ask him. I said that. But it
looked like the Hindenburg going up, which was my
first reaction. And so I got a piece of it. And I
don't know who to tell except you characters. Who
would appreciate that? Do you mind if we just, you
can do your stuff and we'll just talk over here?
Sure. Just finishing up an interview. In the old
days, there wasn't any Icarus. There wasn't any
division for planetary sciences. And now
planetary astronomers in this country have their
own society and their own journal. Do you think
that's good or bad? Well, I think it's good. On the
one hand, it has provided a medium for us to publish
all the kinds of things that we do. There is, of
course, a downside to it. And a quick illustrative
point might be useful. At the time that radio
astronomy was developing as a kind of a separate
discipline, there was some discussion as to
whether or not the radio astronomers should have
their own journal. And Otto Struve, I believe, was
the vociferous proponent of not having a separate
journal. and keeping astrophysics unified
through the astrophysical journal,
principally, and the astronomical journal,
whether the results come from the radio part of the
spectrum or the optical infrared part of the
spectrum. So that's a voice in favor of keeping
things together. However, because,
and this is now a personal view, because of the
animosity or the ambivalence, let's soften it a
bit, too, that we've already talked about between
classical astronomers and planetary
scientists, there has developed a kind of set of
different standards to which research papers
should be held for publication. And I think that if
the Astrophysical Journal were the only medium
for the publication of planetary science papers,
we would have a lot of problems getting some of our
work published. Not because it's intrinsically
inferior in quality, but because it's different.
And some of our standards are a bit different. Some
of them are fully as rigorous as those to which
classical astrophysicists hold their work.
Certainly superior in cosmology. Perhaps, yes, I
think so. I've found myself apologetic about the
quality of spectra that I've published and
interpreted from time to time. And then I
occasionally see what my astrophysics
colleagues are doing, and I feel less apologetic.
What do you think was the impact of the fact that we
have found no evidence for life anywhere else in
the solar system. Do you think that's really hurt
funding, in particular Mars? Oh, I don't think
funding has been hurt by the lack of funding life
elsewhere. That seems to me to be quite a separate
activity, endeavor, quite a separate
philosophical issue to planetary science or to
pure science. I've become more and more aware in
just the last few years that so much science policy
in the United States is politically driven,
motivated, and controlled that it's almost
independent of the scientific merit of projects
that we're trying to do. This is certainly true of
big science projects such as planetary
exploration programs. And most recently, the
program for the search for extraterrestrial
intelligence, which is such a politically
charged issue. And which has been funded out of
existence, I guess. In just recent weeks, it has
been funded out of existence, at least at the
moment. But you see, that political wind can
change directions very quickly and may again.
What do you think the public thinks about
planetary astronomy? Planetary astronomy in the
public's view, I think, is a productive and
exciting endeavor. It's gotten a lot of press.
It's highly amenable to promotion by exciting
results and pictures to go with it. And it, in many
ways, is the connection point between the public
and astronomical science. It seems to me that as a
former teacher and as a person who talks publicly
about science quite a bit, that the public has two
points of connection with astronomy. One is, what
is a black hole, which is a question that comes up at
nearly every contact with a layperson. And what
are the planets made out of, or some other question
of comparable interest specifically to solar
system things. And I'd like to punctuate that by
noting that projects which are primarily
classical astrophysics in nature, such as the
Hubble Space Telescope, get a tremendous amount
of mileage out of their photographs of the
planets. And I think that's just fine. I wish our
astrophysics colleagues would acknowledge the
value of planetary science, if only for its PR
value in that respect. That brings up a point that
Oren Nix, who's a co-investigator on this, made in
his book, Far Travelers. And it was something that
I saw when I was at headquarters, that the, quote,
real, unquote, scientists did not want any
pictures of The theory being that if you could
actually look at something and see right there
that it wasn't real science. Did you get that
impression? Well, maybe so. Maybe so. I'll
go back to the issue of the composition of the
surface of Triton and our detection of methane and
nitrogen. The detection of those chemicals on
Triton's surface essentially at the time that
Voyager was launched in the late 70s, 1977.
Only over the next several years did it become
apparent that Voyager was actually going to go to
Triton and have a look at this object that I had been
straining my eyes and telescopes to see for all
those years and to get an up-close look. Now, I had
pretty much concluded to my satisfaction and the
satisfaction of the other very few colleagues
interested in the subject of what Triton Circus
would look like when we got there. But to then enjoy
the extreme thrill of seeing it up close in my own
lifetime, while it was still a topic of scientific
interest and importance to me, was just about
unparalleled. It did not. by having pictures of
the surface of this object decrease or diminish
its interest to me or to my colleagues in the
slightest way. And as I indicated, we've
continued to observe this thing. Even though we
know in detail what its surface looks like, we've
continued to observe it with ground-based
telescopes where it remains an unresolved,
faint, distant, cold point of light. Now, how that
attitude persists with classical
astrophysicists who now can see deep into the core
of M31 with HST or deep into the cores of jetting
galaxies and other objects of interest to
astrophysicists? I don't know. I would hope that
they haven't lost their interest and excitement
in an object just because they can see it better.
What kind of a job do you think Planetary
Astronomers have done of selling themselves to
the public and to the Congress? Planetary
astronomers have not dealt well with Congress, in
part because we are naive academics by nature and
feel that politics and politicians are to be held
at arm's distance. And it's only been in the last 10
years that we as a profession have become aware of
the necessity to deal with political people and
political issues because we are a creation of a
political entity. namely the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, and are
totally dependent on government funding. People
in the Congress have told us how naive we are and how
aloof we have appeared to be. On the one hand,
depending on the Congress and public funding for
our support of our expensive hobbies, and on the
other hand, being unwilling to deal with
politicians in a real way. So planetary
scientists have have grown up a bit, I think, in the
last decade or decade and a half through the
necessity of having to deal with politics and
politicians. So that's probably to the good. It
isn't any fun. And I particularly don't like it.
But it seems to be a fact of life. I don't think we do
it very effectively yet. In terms of dealing with
the public, I think we've done quite well. The
Voyager missions and all the press that was
attendant to those flybys, half a dozen of them,
was a great experience, a great positive
experience. Pictures of the planets from Voyager
appeared on the covers of national news magazines
around the world. Planetary scientists were
interviewed. I was interviewed. And David
Morrison and I, at the time that Pioneer went by
Saturn, held what I think is the world's only, and
certainly the first, press conference devoted
entirely to Saturn satellite Iapetus. And so the
public has gotten a dose of some rather arcane
science through the successes of Voyager and
Pioneer and Viking, of course, and Galileo, and we
hope that that sequence will continue. I think
we've done well with the public, not so well with
the politicians. There's been a lot of attention
in the past few years to making planetary
astronomy a practical science, and there's been a
lot of publicity, certainly, about killer
asteroids, ozone hole, global warming, search
for extraterrestrial intelligence. I suppose
that's good for getting money, but do you think
it's been overdone a bit? Well, I'm not sure it has
been overdone. No, I don't think it has yet. And I'm
not sure that there's any expectation that it will
be overdone. There is, of course, some concern
about returning to the thrilling days of
yesteryear when planetary science had a crazy
element, or at least a perceived crazy element,
namely the diversable lowell types. And that
could happen again if the crazies really did get a
hold of these various topics.
Planetary scientists have done a pretty good job
of keeping that from happening. the issue of
impacts on the Earth from comets and so on, has been
promoted, discussed, and embellished by genuine
scientists. Eugene Shoemaker, David Morrison,
Clark Chapman, and various other people have been
writing at the popular level and testifying
before Congress and dealing with NASA committees
in a very professional way. And this, I think, is
what's keeping it from going crazy. In the SETI
era, into things. We have Jill Tarter, we have
Frank Drake, we have Carl Sagan, all of whom are
respected, very legitimate scientists dealing
with these issues. And if we can keep it on that
plane, I think we can keep it under control. What do
you think the state of planetary astronomy is now?
Going up, going down, hanging in there? Well, the
state of planetary astronomy now here in the
beginning of fiscal year 94 is continuing to
decline in terms of of the availability of public
money for it. The National Science Foundation
supports it at a very, very low level. And may not
continue. And may not continue. NASA funding for
planetary science is under continual attack,
pressure, let's say, because of the cost of other
NASA programs. Yet the population of planetary
scientists continues to increase. And that's
evidenced by the increased attendance of the
Division for Planetary Sciences meetings held
every year. And the quality of the work that comes
out of those meetings continues to go up. And young
people are continually attracted to this field,
in spite of the fact that the funding pressure and
the pressure for other resources continues to
grow. So it's a peculiar situation. And I think
that the reason that the interest in it continues
to grow is because of its intrinsic value, its
intrinsic interest, and its intrinsic relevance
to understanding The Earth is a planet.
Somebody's getting their bachelor's degree, and
they're interested in planetary astronomy. What
do you say to them? I say that your prospects for
getting a job and support are not particularly
good. But if you are driven to do this, for the same
reasons that I was driven as a 13- or 14-year-old
kid to do it, then go ahead. Give it your best shot.
Well, that was actually the situation for
astronomy in general when we were under Richard.
That's right, in a way. We were not encouraged to go
into astronomy because there was any sense of
lucrative employment or even a guarantee of any
job or anything of the kind. And information
distributed to random inquirers by the American
Astronomical Society when I was a kid said such
things as, there is very little room in astronomy
for people of marginal ability. And that's
probably still true. I consider myself a person of
marginal ability, but I had super marginal
persistence and dedication, and I had to become an
astronomer. And so I did, and I've been able to do it
reasonably successfully. Before there was even
an NASA. Before there was, yes. And so I would tell a
person in the situation you just described that if
you have to do this, then you have to do it. and
somehow you and the rest of us will find a way. And so
when I find such a person with that kind of
dedication and devotion, I do my very best to make
them feel welcome in this profession, to help them
both professionally and at the technical level,
and try to get them involved, because that's where
the discoveries will come from, is the people who
are driven to do it. The death of the Mars Observer
Probe to me at least, seem to come as a shock to a lot
of people that have been in this field for only 10 or
20 years. We both remember when failures of
planetary and lunar probes were the norm rather
than the exception. Do you think this is a good slap
in the face to wake some people up? Well, in a way,
it's a slap in the face in many respects. Or a dash of
cold water. A dash of cold water. It certainly
shows that one can't be sanguine about the
successes from complicated, expensive space
probes. The Vikings kind of worked, and the
Voyagers kind of worked, and I think people got fat
and happy. Yes, we did. One of the most serious
elements of this now, of course, is that there are
very few other spacecraft programs that are
flying or expected to fly in a reasonable amount of
time. Whereas in the 70s and 80s, there were
programs under development more or less
continuously, and at least the prospect of flying
was not too remote or too distant. So young people
coming into the field, and also we were going to
planets that were relatively close by and didn't
take forever to get there. So the situation is
different now in that a person who has just been
terminated in a funding sense by the failure of
Mars Observer doesn't necessarily have any
prospects on the immediate horizon to pick them up
and to keep them actively employed and
scientifically productive in the intervening
years. That's a very serious problem because some
of these people will be forced to drift away into
other fields just because of the lack of support.
There is no buffer program which can pick them up.
This is a leading question, and it calls for a
personal answer. I have heard it said at DPS
meetings that we need planetary probes to keep the
scientists interested. And my very feeling
always was that if the scientists were supposed to
generate the interest themselves, whether they
have probes or not. Your comments? Well, I tend to
feel, as I think you do, that the intrinsic merit of
this science will generate the interest on the
part of people truly devoted to planetary
studies, independent of the probes. The probes
provide the very, very important... Stuff that we
otherwise couldn't get at all. Things that we
cannot do in any other way, that's true. But we've
already seen just a few days ago that... work from
essentially images of Mars from the distance of
the Earth, taken in the proper way, in this case
with the Hubble Space Telescope, but also from the
ground, can still produce important science,
despite the fact that we've been to Mars with a
number of orbiters and two landers from the United
States and so on. So there's still a lot of work that
can be done on the planets, but some of it simply
cannot be done without probes. Nonetheless,
there are many compelling planetary problems
that will keep real scientists interested
indefinitely into the future, even if there is
never another planetary probe. The field will
shrink, of course, and there will be a smaller
number of people doing it, but the people who are
driven to understand the solar system, its
nature, and its relationship to other systems of
stars and dust and things in our galaxy and
elsewhere will do this work no matter what. One
last and leading question. I was going to say, what
do you think, in the last 30 years, the greatest
development in planetary astronomy has been? But
I'm reminded of the fact that when we were
students, there were the gas giants and then there
were the terrestrial planets. And we didn't
realize there's a whole different kind of planet,
the ice planets and all that sort of stuff. Do you
think that is the most important thing we found
out? Or do you have your particular candidate? I
think it's very important that we've discovered
that each planet is its own kind and that there is
this vast collection of icy bodies in the outer
solar system. But I'm inclined to think that the
most important realization is that it's a picture
that's still evolving and emerging and a picture
to which not all planetary scientists have yet
signed up. And that is our connection to
interstellar space to other material elsewhere
in the galaxy. I'm particularly impressed by the
detection of organic material in the solar
system, even in the inner solar system, that
clearly had its origins on the grains of
interstellar dust among the stars in the diffused
interstellar medium. This material, some of it
has come into the solar system relatively
unaltered, and we're just beginning to detect and
understand that. Other of that material has been
highly altered, and we are some of that stuff.